# buildsys3

[Originally a post on Dhall Discourse](https://discourse.dhall-lang.org/t/some-insights-on-making-a-dhall-based-application/549)

For the past couple weeks I've been working a
[build system that uses Dhall](https://github.com/ear7h/buildsys3)
as the base language, and I wanted to share my experience to anyone who
might want to similarly use Dhall as a front end for their application. in
this post I'll briefly explain why I chose to integrate Dhall into my
project, but focus on the interfaces between Haskell and Dhall, and
Dhall and the user.

My goal was to create a more flexible and composable version of
`make`. With make you get caching and incremental builds for free, but
deviating from the conventional directory structure (separate build or
cache directories, or conflicting names between source and intermediate
files) or dynamic behavior requires even more specialized external tools
like `cmake` and poorly defined/non-obvious conditionals. Dhall provides
well defined semantics and FP lends itself to DRY-ing.

## Dhall to Haskell

The back end is written in Haskell and handles all the IO operations. The
core of the back end is the `Item` type:

```haskell
data Command = MkCommand
    { cmd :: String
    , args :: [String]
    }

data Item
    = Generated
        { results :: [String]
        , command :: Command
        , prereqs :: [Item]
        }
    | Source String
```

An `Item` is either a source file or it can be generated. A generated
file can depend on other `Item`s, which get built first and also
trigger rebuilds of dependents when changed. This is a natural
translation of the concepts of a build system into Haskell. Ideally,
I'd like to express my build instructions in a similar recursive
manner. While Dhall doesn't allow this type to be translated
directly, the docs provide
[a helpful guide for working around this limitation](https://docs.dhall-lang.org/howtos/How-to-translate-recursive-code-to-Dhall.html)
but only on the Dhall side of things. This doesn't exactly solve my
problem, but it does get me one step closer. The linear structure could
be tokens, such as those output by a lexer, and then I'd just parse
those tokens back into a recursive structure in Haskell. This is what
a token looks like:

```haskell
data Token
    = TOpen
    | TClose
    | TGenerated [String] Command
    | TSource String
```

`TOpen` and `TClose` are like parenthesis which mark the beginning and
end of a `TGenerated`'s `prereqs`. For example the following token list:
```haskell
[ TGenerated ["hello2.txt"] (MkCommand "cp" ["hello1.txt", "hello2.txt"])
, TOpen
, TGenerated ["hello1.txt"] (MkCommand "touch" ["hello1.txt"])
, TOpen
, TClose
, TClose
]
```
Would be parsed as:
```haskell
(Generated
  ["hello2.txt"]
  (MkCommand "cp" ["hello1.txt", "hello2.txt"])
  [ Generated ["hello1.txt"] (MkCommand "touch" ["hello1.txt"]) [] ]
)
```

The current parser is hand-written but in the future, or in
other similar projects, I think I could actually use a parser
library like
[happy](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/happy)
or
[megaparsec](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/megaparsec).

## User to Dhall

My implementation for a recursive type is slightly different, and
less general than what the guide I linked above suggests. It suggests
a function generic over the linear output type, however I have made
it static for my own convenience for the time being (it only needs to
output tokens, but I might experiment with outputting a bash script in
the future). In Dhall the `Item` type looks like this:

```dhall
-- ./prelude.dhall
let Item
    : Type
    = ∀ (MkItem :
        { source : Text → List Token
        , generated :
          { results : List Text
          , command : Command
          , prereqs : List (List Token)
          } → List Token
        }
      ) → List Token
```

Once again, the link above provides a good explanation of the pattern,
but the short version is that an `Item` is a function that takes record
of functions that can linearize a `source` item and a `generated`
item and returns the linearization. Creating such a type is unwieldy,
so I've also provided the following helper functions:

```dhall
-- ./prelude.dhall
let generated
  : { results : List Text
    , command : Command
    , prereqs : List Item
    } → Item
  = ...

let source
  : Text → Item
  = ...
```
Using them allows writing `Item`s in a recursive way:
```dhall
-- ./default.dhall
let B = ./prelude.dhall
let cmd = λ(cmd : Text) → λ(args : List Text) → { cmd, args } : B.Command
in B.generated
  { results = [ "hello2.txt" ]
  , command = cmd "cp" ["hello1.txt", "hello2.txt"]
  , prereqs =
    [ B.source "hello1.txt"
    ]
  }
```
This pattern is also present in the standard Dhall prelude's `XML`
package, which is where I first familiarized myself with it.

Lastly, to generate the tokens so that the Haskell program can understand
it, there's a `build` function. It takes an `Item` and passes the record
functions to it, so that it generates a `List Token`:
```dhall
-- ./prelude.dhall
let build
    : Item → List Token
```

It can be used like so:
```dhall
-- buildsys.dhall, the buildsys3 binary looks for a file with this name
let B = ./prelude.dhall
in { default = B.build ./default.dhall }
```

## Conclusion

Recursive types come up often in many problems and while Dhall can help
simplify interaction with such problems, some extra effort is required
by tool authors to linearize the problem.

Thanks for reading, if you're curious about using
the build system you can check out the
[examples directory](https://github.com/ear7h/buildsys3/tree/main/example)
or
[the source code to my website](https://github.com/ear7h/website1/blob/main/buildsys.dhall)
which was my latest inspiration for making a better build system.

