# CSE 167 Final Project Write-up

For the final project I've implemented shadow mapping in a reusable
3D graphics library for the Rust programming language. Most of my time
was spent fitting the components from the homework into the Rust paradigms,
but this write up will focus on shadow mapping.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/U1xzwkTk-u0" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Demo and code

For the code, please look at this commit tree:

https://github.com/ear7h/graphics-lib/tree/47e1a4172e3745c486826b6ca9414cbe313fe591

For the demo check the releases page for a linux binary:

https://github.com/ear7h/graphics-lib/releases

Or, if you have `cargo` installed:

```

git clone https://github.com/ear7h/graphics-lib
# make sure to run the program from ./src, shaders are looked for relative
# to the working directory
cd graphics-lib/src
git checkout 47e1a4172e3745c486826b6ca9414cbe313fe591
cargo run --bin demo1
```

## Shadow mapping basics

Shadows occur when light rays are obstructed by an object. These rays can be
absorbed or reflected by the object, and mostly don't arrive at their
original destination making any obstructed objects darker. Shadow mapping
attempts to approximate shadows by simulating only the first bounce from a
light source. The light source is treated like a camera (with position and
perspective matrix) and the scene is rendered from this camera, in
"light space", and the depth values are saved in a texture for use in the
final render. Note that only the minimum depth values are saved
(ex. with `GL_DEPTH_TEST`).  The depth values are the lengths of rays
from the light source to their first bounce. In the final render the
position of a fragment is put into light space. The `x` and `y` of
the light space position are the texture *coordinates*. The `z` is the
depth of the current object which is compared to the texture *value*.
If the `z` is greater than the texture value, then the fragment is in
shadow.

## The library

Before digging into the shadow mapping implementation I'll give a
brief overview of the library.

The entrypoint is the `App` trait.

```rust
pub trait App {
    fn init(ctx : &mut GraphicsContext) -> Self;

    fn update(
        &mut self,
        event : glutin::event::Event<'_, ()>,
        ctx : &mut GraphicsContext,
        control_flow : &mut glutin::event_loop::ControlFlow,
    );
}
```

`init` creates an `App` from a `GraphicsContext` and `update` responds to
an input event by making changes to itself, rendering, or closing (by
modifying `control_flow`).

`GraphicsContext` is a high level wrapper over
[`glow`](https://crates.io/crates/glow) exposing methods for rendering
3D scenes. `glow` is itself a thin wrapper of the usual C OpenGL API that
uses Rust types.


Shadow mapping is not exposed externally; it is implemented within
the `GraphicsContext::render_scene` method and an internal
`ShadowMapper` type.

`ShadowMapper` contains the stateless resources for shadow mapping:

```rust
pub struct ShadowMapper {
    prog : LoadedProg,
    fbo : glow::Framebuffer,
}
```

These only need to be allocated once and can generate multiple shadow
maps. The shadow maps are generated with `ShadowMapper::render_light`:

```rust
fn render_light(
    &self,
    ctx : &GraphicsContext,
    tex : glow::Texture,
    lightspace : Mat4,
    scene : &scene_graph::Scene<'_, Light, Surface, LoadedObj>,
)
```

Which renders the scene with the given light space matrix to the
texture. The function body can be summarized by:

1. bind the `self.fbo` framebuffer
2. bind the `tex` texture
3. bind the texture to the framebuffer with `glFramebufferTexture2D`
4. use the `self.prog` program
5. for each scene object:
	1. set the light space and model matrix uniforms
	2. bind the vertex array object
	3. draw the object with `glDrawElements`

The shadow mapping program simply multiplies the vertex by
`lightspace * vertex` and the fragment shader is empty. Only the
depth values need to be saved to the texture, this is controlled
when textures are created using `GL_DEPTH_COMPONENT` as the
texture's internal format.

`GraphicsContext::render_scene` is similar to
`ShadowMapper::render_light`, but it uses a user supplied
program, the default framebuffer, and it preprocesses the
lights (generating shadow maps) before drawing the objects.
The library can handle multiple lights with or without
shadow mapping. The current implementation for this is
hacky: reusing a 1x1 texture with value 0 as the shadow map for
non-shadow-casting lights. A side effect of this hack is that
I can't use 2D array textures, thus dynamically accessing them
isn't possible in the final shader. The result is this
monstrosity:

```glsl
#define CASE(N) case N: \
    return texture(lights.shadows[N], uv).x;

float shadow_texture(vec2 uv, int idx) {
    switch (idx) {
        CASE(0)
        CASE(1)
        CASE(2)
        CASE(3)
        CASE(4)
        CASE(5)
        CASE(6)
        CASE(7)
        CASE(8)
        CASE(9)
        default:
            return 1.0;
    }
}
```

Lastly, the shadow calculation in the shader is as follows:

```glsl
for (int i = 0; i < lights.len; i++) {
    float shadow = 1.0;

    // scale and offset needed for NDC -> texture coordinates
    vec3 lightspace = dehomo(lights.lightspaces[i] * vec4(position, 1.0)) * 0.5 +
        vec3(0.5);

    if (shadow_texture(lightspace.xy, i) < lightspace.z - 0.005f || lightspace.z < 0.005f) {
        shadow = 0.0;
    }

    // multiply the diffuse and specular components of phong lighting
    // by shadow
}
```

## Conclusion

Shadow mapping was conceptually not too difficult to understand, but
it touches many different corners of the OpenGL API as well as
imposing architectural constraints.

